README.md, before:

# CS 1230 Project 7: Beauty Mountain

## Demo

https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/a7f309e1-479c-43e0-89e8-0d570fab621b

## Design Choices

### 1. L-Systems (40 pts)

**Files:** `src/vegetation/lsystem_tree.cpp`, `src/vegetation/lsystem_tree.h`

#### Grammar & Rewriting

We implement a parametric L-System with the following alphabet:

| Symbol | Action |
|--------|--------|
| `F` | Move forward, draw branch segment |
| `X` | Growth node (emits leaf cluster) |
| `+`/`-` | Yaw rotation (±baseAngle with jitter) |
| `&`/`^` | Pitch rotation |
| `[`/`]` | Push/pop turtle state |

Three randomized production rules for variety:
```
Axiom: X
X → F[+FX][-FX][&FX][^FX]FX      (symmetric 4-way branching)
X → F[+F&X][-F^X][+FX][&FX]X     (asymmetric mixed)
X → F[+FX[&X]][-FX[^X]][&FX[+X]][^FX[-X]]X   (nested sub-branches)
F → FF
```

Each tree randomly selects one X-rule, creating diverse canopy shapes across the forest.

#### Turtle Interpreter

The `interpret()` function traverses the L-string maintaining turtle state `(pos, forward, up, right, radius)`. Key design decisions:

1. **Branch Geometry:** Each `F` generates a cylinder via `segmentMatrix()`, computing a model matrix that aligns the unit cylinder to segment endpoints. A 1.05× overlap factor prevents visible gaps.

2. **Radius Decay:** On `[`, radius multiplies by `radiusDecay` (default 0.75), creating natural tapering from trunk to twigs.

3. **Tropism:** Fine branches (radius < 0.7× base) bend slightly toward world +Y, simulating phototropism:
   ```cpp
   float k = 0.05f * (1.0f - rNorm);
   t.forward = normalize(t.forward + vec3(0,1,0) * k);
   ```

4. **Roll Randomization:** On `[`, a random roll around the forward axis (±angleJitter×0.7) breaks coplanar branching for more natural 3D structure.

5. **Leaf Clusters:** `emitLeafCluster()` first generates a short randomized twig, then scatters 26-58 ellipsoidal leaves around its endpoint. Leaf count scales with `leafDensity` parameter and inversely with branch thickness.

#### Forest Generation (`buildForest`)

Trees are placed in clusters with biome-aware constraints:

1. **Three UI Sliders:**
   - **Parameter 4 (s4):** Vegetation coverage — controls cluster count (52–172) and cluster radius
   - **Parameter 5 (s5):** Tree size — controls step length, base radius, iteration count (2–3)
   - **Parameter 6 (s6):** Leaf density — scales leaf count per cluster (0.5×–2.0×)

2. **Placement Logic:**
   - Cluster centers randomly sampled on terrain
   - Only "grassland" biome receives trees; cliffs and snow peaks excluded

3. **Per-Tree Randomization:**
   - Step length: ±30% variation scaled by size slider
   - Base angle: ±6° jitter
   - Radius decay: randomized in [0.6, 0.95]
   - Grammar rule: randomly selected from 3 variants

4. **Instance Limits:** 800,000 branches / 1,600,000 leaves max to prevent GPU memory overflow.

---

### 2. Instanced Rendering (20 pts)

**Files:** `realtime.cpp`, `shaders/forest.vert`

#### Motivation

A single tree generates 50-200 branch segments. With 50+ trees, naive rendering would require 5000+ draw calls per frame, causing severe CPU bottleneck.

#### Implementation

1. **Instance Buffer Setup:**
   ```cpp
   // mat4 occupies attribute locations 2,3,4,5
   for (int i = 0; i < 4; ++i) {
       glEnableVertexAttribArray(2 + i);
       glVertexAttribPointer(2 + i, 4, GL_FLOAT, GL_FALSE,
                             sizeof(glm::mat4), (void*)(i * sizeof(glm::vec4)));
       glVertexAttribDivisor(2 + i, 1);
   }
   ```

2. **Vertex Shader:**
   ```glsl
   layout(location = 2) in mat4 aModel;
   void main() {
       vec4 world = aModel * vec4(a_pos, 1.0);
       mat3 normalMat = mat3(transpose(inverse(aModel)));
       v_worldNormal = normalize(normalMat * a_nor);
       gl_Position = uProj * uView * world;
   }
   ```

3. **Draw Call:** Single `glDrawArraysInstanced()` renders all branches, then all leaves.

#### Shared Geometry

All branches share one cylinder mesh; all leaves share one sphere mesh. This minimizes VRAM usage while supporting thousands of instances at 60 FPS.

---

### 3. Normal Mapping (40 pts)

**Files:** `shaders/terrain.frag`, `shaders/water.frag`

#### TBN Construction

We construct tangent-space basis from the geometric normal:
```glsl
vec3 T = normalize(cross(up, N_geom));
vec3 B = normalize(cross(N_geom, T));
mat3 TBN = mat3(T, B, N_geom);
vec3 nWorld = normalize(TBN * (texture(normalMap, uv).xyz * 2.0 - 1.0));
```

#### Multi-Layer Terrain

Five material layers with full PBR texture sets (albedo, normal, roughness):

| Layer | Condition |
|-------|-----------|
| Grass | Low-mid elevation, flat |
| Rock (low) | Near water, steep slopes |
| Rock (high) | High elevation, steep |
| Beach | Water edge, flat |
| Snow | High elevation, relatively flat |

Blending weights computed from normalized height `hNorm` and slope `(1 - dot(N, up))`, with `smoothstep` transitions.

#### Tri-Planar Projection

Steep surfaces use tri-planar mapping to avoid UV stretching:
```glsl
vec3 n = abs(normal); n /= (n.x + n.y + n.z);
return texture(tex, pos.zy).rgb * n.x +
       texture(tex, pos.xz).rgb * n.y +
       texture(tex, pos.xy).rgb * n.z;
```

---

### 4. Scrolling Textures (20 pts)

**Files:** `shaders/water.frag`, `realtime.cpp`

#### Time Accumulation
```cpp
void Realtime::timerEvent(QTimerEvent*) {
    float dt = m_elapsedTimer.elapsed() * 0.001f;
    m_time += dt;
}
```

#### UV Animation
```glsl
vec2 uv = v_uv * uTiling + uScrollDir * (uTime * uScrollSpeed);
vec3 nTS = texture(uNormalMap, uv).xyz * 2.0 - 1.0;
```

Parameters: `uTiling=3.0`, `uScrollSpeed=0.05`, `uScrollDir=(1.0, 0.3)`.

Only the normal map scrolls—base color remains static—creating subtle wave motion without obvious texture sliding.

---

### 5. Realtime Fog (20 pts)

**Files:** `shaders/terrain.frag`, `shaders/forest.frag`

#### Exponential Distance Fog
```glsl
float dist = length(uEye - v_worldPos);
float fog = 1.0 - exp(-uFogDensity * dist);
color = mix(color, uFogColor, clamp(fog, 0.0, 1.0));
```

Fog color `(0.55, 0.70, 0.90)` matches the sky horizon, creating seamless atmospheric perspective. Density `0.02` provides gradual falloff from ~20 to ~100 world units.

---
### 6. Particle System (20 pts)

**Files:** `particlesystem.cpp`, `particlesystem.h`, `particle.vert`, `particle.frag`

#### Instanced Rendering

To efficiently render thousands of precipitation particles, we utilize **Instanced Rendering**. Instead of issuing a draw call for each particle, we use a single `glDrawArraysInstanced` call to render a shared quad geometry.

- **Data Layout:**
  - **Per-Vertex:** Local quad coordinates (static VBO).
  - **Per-Instance:** World position, color, and size (dynamic VBOs with `glVertexAttribDivisor(..., 1)`).
- **Buffer Management:** Particle state is updated on the CPU and streamed to the GPU via `glBufferData` with `GL_STREAM_DRAW` each frame.

#### Weather Types & Physics

The system supports two distinct weather modes, automatically toggled by the Color Grading presets:

1. **Snow (Type 0):**
   - **Motion:** Particles fall slowly with a sinusoidal sway in X/Z to simulate air resistance and turbulence.
   - **Appearance:** Soft, circular billboards generated in the fragment shader using `smoothstep` for fuzzy edges.
   - **Lifecycle:** Particles respawn at random heights when they hit the ground or expire.

2. **Rain (Type 1):**
   - **Motion:** Fast vertical descent.
   - **Appearance:** Elongated streaks. The vertex shader stretches the billboard along the Y-axis based on velocity, while the fragment shader applies a vertical fade gradient.

#### Shader-Based Billboarding

To ensure particles always face the camera, we perform billboarding in the vertex shader:
```glsl
vec3 cameraRight = vec3(view[0][0], view[1][0], view[2][0]);
vec3 cameraUp = vec3(view[0][1], view[1][1], view[2][1]);
vec3 vertexPos = aInstancePos + offset 
               + cameraRight * aLocalPos.x * size 
               + cameraUp * aLocalPos.y * size;
```

---

### 7. Camera Path (20 pts)

**Files:** `camera_path.h`, `bezier.h`, `realtime.cpp`

#### Piecewise Bezier Splines

We implemented a robust **Piecewise Bezier Spline** system to create smooth, cinematic camera movements. The system decouples position and rotation interpolation to handle the 6-DOF camera state effectively.

- **Algorithm:** **De Casteljau's Algorithm** is used for numerical stability when evaluating points on the curve.
- **Continuity:** The system ensures **C1 Continuity** (continuous velocity), preventing jerky camera movements at keyframe transitions.

#### Space-Agnostic Interpolation

The `BezierSpline` class is templated and uses a `SpaceTraits` struct to define interpolation rules for different data types:

1. **Position (`glm::vec3`):** Uses standard linear algebra (Linear Interpolation) for control point calculation.
   ```cpp
   static glm::vec3 Interpolate(const glm::vec3 &x, const glm::vec3 &y, float u) {
       return x + u * (y - x);
   }
   ```

2. **Rotation (`glm::quat`):** Uses **Spherical Linear Interpolation (Slerp)** to interpolate between orientation quaternions. This ensures the camera rotates along the shortest path on the 4D hypersphere with constant angular velocity, avoiding the "gimbal lock" issues of Euler angles.

#### Keyframe System

The path is defined by a sequence of keyframes (Position + Rotation + Time). In `Realtime::timerEvent`, we evaluate the spline at the current time `t` (looping every 20 seconds) to update the camera's View Matrix.

### Post-Processing Pipeline & Color Grading

**Files:** `shaders/post.frag`, `shaders/post.frag`, `src/realtime.cpp`

1. Scene Pass -> HDR Off-Screen FBO
All geometry (terrain, water, sky, L-system forest) is rendered into:
- `m_texSceneColor` — RGBA16F HDR color buffer
- `m_texSceneDepth` — Depth24 buffer
This allows: HDR lighting accumulation, depth-aware effects (fog, atmospheric falloff), a clean separation between rendering and color styling

2. Post-Processing Pass -> Full-screen Quad
A second pass runs a custom shader on a screen-filling quad:
- Tonemapping (Reinhard)
- Exposure control (EV/stop-based)
- Depth linearization
- Fog reconstruction
- Color grading via Lift / Gamma / Gain / Tint
- Mode-dependent LUT-like transformations

#### Weather Presets via Color Grading
We added two cinematic grading presets, toggled by UI checkboxes:

#### Cold Blue (Snowy/Mountain)
- Slight exposure boost
- Cooler tint (blue-leaning)
- Higher contrast
- Crisp atmosphere

This preset enhances the clarity of mountains and snow regions.

#### Rainy / Overcast
A physically motivated grey-blue “rainy day” look:
- Strong desaturation (mixing toward luminance)
- Gamma lift -> reduced mid-tone contrast
- Gain reduction -> softer highlights
- Significant depth-based fog -> low visibility, washed distance
- Cool grey tint

This yields a believable “fog-eats-the-horizon” atmosphere seen in rainy environments.


## UI Controls

| Slider | Effect |
|--------|--------|
| Parameter 1 | Terrain frequency (low = smooth, high = rugged) |
| Parameter 2 | Terrain height scale |
| Parameter 3 | Domain warping strength; river parameters when EC3 enabled |
| Parameter 4 | Vegetation Coverage |
| Parameter 5 | Tree size and complexity |
| Parameter 6 | Leaf density per tree |

| Checkbox | Effect |
|----------|--------|
| EC1 | Terrain terracing (cliff steps) |
| EC2 | Crater generation |
| EC3 | Ridged-noise river valleys |
| EC4 | L-System forest rendering |
| Cold Blue | Cold Blue filter |
| Rainy | Rainy filter |

---

## Collaboration / References

### Code References

- **L-Systems:** [shortstheory/l-systems-opengl](https://github.com/shortstheory/l-systems-opengl) 
  — Referenced for L-System grammar design and turtle interpreter structure.
- **Procedural Terrain:** [AntonHakansson/procedural-terrain](https://github.com/AntonHakansson/procedural-terrain) 
  — Referenced for terrain generation techniques and multi-layer texturing approach.

### Learning Resources

- **L-Systems:** [The Algorithmic Beauty of Plants](http://algorithmicbotany.org/papers/#abop), [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/L-system)
- **Instanced Rendering:** [LearnOpenGL - Instancing](https://learnopengl.com/Advanced-OpenGL/Instancing)
- **Normal Mapping:** [LearnOpenGL - Normal Mapping](https://learnopengl.com/Advanced-Lighting/Normal-Mapping)
- **Tri-Planar Mapping:** [Martin Palko's Guide](https://www.martinpalko.com/triplanar-mapping/)
- **Procedural Terrain:** [Inigo Quilez - fBm](https://iquilezles.org/articles/fbm/), [GPU Gems Ch.1](https://developer.nvidia.com/gpugems/gpugems3/part-i-geometry/chapter-1-generating-complex-procedural-terrains-using-gpu)
- **Fog:** [LearnOpenGL - Fog](https://learnopengl.com/Advanced-OpenGL/Fog)

### Textures

1. Some Terrain PBR textures sourced from [ambientCG](https://ambientcg.com/) (CC0 license).
2. Some Terrain PBR texture sets sourced from 
[AntonHakansson/procedural-terrain](https://github.com/AntonHakansson/procedural-terrain/tree/main).

## File Structure

```
├── resources/
│   ├── shaders/                    # GLSL shader source files
│   │   ├── terrain.vert/frag       # Multi-layer PBR terrain
│   │   ├── water.vert/frag         # Animated water surface
│   │   ├── forest.vert/frag        # Instanced vegetation
│   │   ├── particle.vert/frag      # Instanced particle system (Snow/Rain)  
│   │   ├── sky.vert/frag           # Procedural sky gradient
│   │   ├── default.vert/frag       # Basic Phong shader
│   │   └── post.vert/frag          # Postprocessing pipeline + Color grading
│   └── textures/                   # PBR texture sets
│
└── src/
    ├── particles/                  # Particle System                      
    │   ├── particle.h              # Particle struct definition          
    │   └── particlesystem.cpp/h    # Particle simulation & rendering     
    ├── shapes/                     # Primitive tessellation (from Project 5)
    ├── terrain/
    │   ├── terraingenerator.cpp/h  # Procedural terrain (fBm, rivers, craters)
    │   └── voxel_chunk.cpp/h       # (Unused) voxel terrain experiment
    ├── utils/
    │   ├── aspectratiowidget/      # Qt widget utility
    │   ├── bezier.h                # Generic Bezier Spline implementation   
    │   ├── camera_path.h           # Camera path management               
    │   ├── gl_mesh.h               # GLMesh wrapper with instanced draw
    │   ├── sceneparser.cpp/h       # Scene file parsing
    │   └── shaderloader.h          # Shader compilation utilities
    ├── vegetation/
    │   └── lsystem_tree.cpp/h      # L-System grammar & turtle interpreter
    ├── camera.cpp/h                # Camera controls (view/proj, movement)
    ├── mainwindow.cpp├── resources/
│   ├── shaders/                    # GLSL shader source files
│   │   ├── terrain.vert/frag       # Multi-layer PBR terrain
│   │   ├── water.vert/frag         # Animated water surface
│   │   ├── forest.vert/frag        # Instanced vegetation
│   │   ├── particle.vert/frag      # Instanced particle system (Snow/Rain)  
│   │   ├── sky.vert/frag           # Procedural sky gradient
│   │   ├── default.vert/frag       # Basic Phong shader
│   │   └── post.vert/frag          # Postprocessing pipeline + Color grading
│   └── textures/                   # PBR texture sets
│
└── src/
    ├── particles/                  # Particle System                      
    │   ├── particle.h              # Particle struct definition     
    │   └── particlesystem.cpp/h    # Particle simulation & rendering       
    ├── shapes/                     # Primitive tessellation (from Project 5)
    ├── terrain/
    │   ├── terraingenerator.cpp/h  # Procedural terrain (fBm, rivers, craters)
    │   └── voxel_chunk.cpp/h       # (Unused) voxel terrain experiment
    ├── utils/
    │   ├── aspectratiowidget/      # Qt widget utility
    │   ├── bezier.h                # Generic Bezier Spline implementation  
    │   ├── camera_path.h           # Camera path management                
    │   ├── gl_mesh.h               # GLMesh wrapper with instanced draw
    │   ├── sceneparser.cpp/h       # Scene file parsing
    │   └── shaderloader.h          # Shader compilation utilities
    ├── vegetation/
    │   └── lsystem_tree.cpp/h      # L-System grammar & turtle interpreter
    ├── camera.cpp/h                # Camera controls (view/proj, movement)
    ├── mainwindow.cpp
```

Commit message:

Add project overview to README
Added project overview detailing features and technologies used.

README.md, after:

# CS 1230 Project 7: Beauty Mountain

## Demo

https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/a7f309e1-479c-43e0-89e8-0d570fab621b

## Project Overview:
"Amazing Terrain" is a real-time procedural environment renderer built with C++ and OpenGL. It implements a multi-layer PBR terrain system alongside L-System-based vegetation, optimized through instanced rendering. The environment is further enhanced with dynamic weather particle systems, animated water, and cinematic camera movements driven by piecewise Bezier splines. A comprehensive post-processing pipeline integrates distance fog, and mood-aware color grading to finalize the visual output.

## Design Choices

### 1. L-Systems (40 pts)

**Files:** `src/vegetation/lsystem_tree.cpp`, `src/vegetation/lsystem_tree.h`

#### Grammar & Rewriting

We implement a parametric L-System with the following alphabet:

| Symbol | Action |
|--------|--------|
| `F` | Move forward, draw branch segment |
| `X` | Growth node (emits leaf cluster) |
| `+`/`-` | Yaw rotation (±baseAngle with jitter) |
| `&`/`^` | Pitch rotation |
| `[`/`]` | Push/pop turtle state |

Three randomized production rules for variety:
```
Axiom: X
X → F[+FX][-FX][&FX][^FX]FX      (symmetric 4-way branching)
X → F[+F&X][-F^X][+FX][&FX]X     (asymmetric mixed)
X → F[+FX[&X]][-FX[^X]][&FX[+X]][^FX[-X]]X   (nested sub-branches)
F → FF
```

Each tree randomly selects one X-rule, creating diverse canopy shapes across the forest.

#### Turtle Interpreter

The `interpret()` function traverses the L-string maintaining turtle state `(pos, forward, up, right, radius)`. Key design decisions:

1. **Branch Geometry:** Each `F` generates a cylinder via `segmentMatrix()`, computing a model matrix that aligns the unit cylinder to segment endpoints. A 1.05× overlap factor prevents visible gaps.

2. **Radius Decay:** On `[`, radius multiplies by `radiusDecay` (default 0.75), creating natural tapering from trunk to twigs.

3. **Tropism:** Fine branches (radius < 0.7× base) bend slightly toward world +Y, simulating phototropism:
   ```cpp
   float k = 0.05f * (1.0f - rNorm);
   t.forward = normalize(t.forward + vec3(0,1,0) * k);
   ```

4. **Roll Randomization:** On `[`, a random roll around the forward axis (±angleJitter×0.7) breaks coplanar branching for more natural 3D structure.

5. **Leaf Clusters:** `emitLeafCluster()` first generates a short randomized twig, then scatters 26-58 ellipsoidal leaves around its endpoint. Leaf count scales with `leafDensity` parameter and inversely with branch thickness.

#### Forest Generation (`buildForest`)

Trees are placed in clusters with biome-aware constraints:

1. **Three UI Sliders:**
   - **Parameter 4 (s4):** Vegetation coverage — controls cluster count (52–172) and cluster radius
   - **Parameter 5 (s5):** Tree size — controls step length, base radius, iteration count (2–3)
   - **Parameter 6 (s6):** Leaf density — scales leaf count per cluster (0.5×–2.0×)

2. **Placement Logic:**
   - Cluster centers randomly sampled on terrain
   - Only "grassland" biome receives trees; cliffs and snow peaks excluded

3. **Per-Tree Randomization:**
   - Step length: ±30% variation scaled by size slider
   - Base angle: ±6° jitter
   - Radius decay: randomized in [0.6, 0.95]
   - Grammar rule: randomly selected from 3 variants

4. **Instance Limits:** 800,000 branches / 1,600,000 leaves max to prevent GPU memory overflow.

---

### 2. Instanced Rendering (20 pts)

**Files:** `realtime.cpp`, `shaders/forest.vert`

#### Motivation

A single tree generates 50-200 branch segments. With 50+ trees, naive rendering would require 5000+ draw calls per frame, causing severe CPU bottleneck.

#### Implementation

1. **Instance Buffer Setup:**
   ```cpp
   // mat4 occupies attribute locations 2,3,4,5
   for (int i = 0; i < 4; ++i) {
       glEnableVertexAttribArray(2 + i);
       glVertexAttribPointer(2 + i, 4, GL_FLOAT, GL_FALSE,
                             sizeof(glm::mat4), (void*)(i * sizeof(glm::vec4)));
       glVertexAttribDivisor(2 + i, 1);
   }
   ```

2. **Vertex Shader:**
   ```glsl
   layout(location = 2) in mat4 aModel;
   void main() {
       vec4 world = aModel * vec4(a_pos, 1.0);
       mat3 normalMat = mat3(transpose(inverse(aModel)));
       v_worldNormal = normalize(normalMat * a_nor);
       gl_Position = uProj * uView * world;
   }
   ```

3. **Draw Call:** Single `glDrawArraysInstanced()` renders all branches, then all leaves.

#### Shared Geometry

All branches share one cylinder mesh; all leaves share one sphere mesh. This minimizes VRAM usage while supporting thousands of instances at 60 FPS.

---

### 3. Normal Mapping (40 pts)

**Files:** `shaders/terrain.frag`, `shaders/water.frag`

#### TBN Construction

We construct tangent-space basis from the geometric normal:
```glsl
vec3 T = normalize(cross(up, N_geom));
vec3 B = normalize(cross(N_geom, T));
mat3 TBN = mat3(T, B, N_geom);
vec3 nWorld = normalize(TBN * (texture(normalMap, uv).xyz * 2.0 - 1.0));
```

#### Multi-Layer Terrain

Five material layers with full PBR texture sets (albedo, normal, roughness):

| Layer | Condition |
|-------|-----------|
| Grass | Low-mid elevation, flat |
| Rock (low) | Near water, steep slopes |
| Rock (high) | High elevation, steep |
| Beach | Water edge, flat |
| Snow | High elevation, relatively flat |

Blending weights computed from normalized height `hNorm` and slope `(1 - dot(N, up))`, with `smoothstep` transitions.

#### Tri-Planar Projection

Steep surfaces use tri-planar mapping to avoid UV stretching:
```glsl
vec3 n = abs(normal); n /= (n.x + n.y + n.z);
return texture(tex, pos.zy).rgb * n.x +
       texture(tex, pos.xz).rgb * n.y +
       texture(tex, pos.xy).rgb * n.z;
```

---

### 4. Scrolling Textures (20 pts)

**Files:** `shaders/water.frag`, `realtime.cpp`

#### Time Accumulation
```cpp
void Realtime::timerEvent(QTimerEvent*) {
    float dt = m_elapsedTimer.elapsed() * 0.001f;
    m_time += dt;
}
```

#### UV Animation
```glsl
vec2 uv = v_uv * uTiling + uScrollDir * (uTime * uScrollSpeed);
vec3 nTS = texture(uNormalMap, uv).xyz * 2.0 - 1.0;
```

Parameters: `uTiling=3.0`, `uScrollSpeed=0.05`, `uScrollDir=(1.0, 0.3)`.

Only the normal map scrolls—base color remains static—creating subtle wave motion without obvious texture sliding.

---

### 5. Realtime Fog (20 pts)

**Files:** `shaders/terrain.frag`, `shaders/forest.frag`

#### Exponential Distance Fog
```glsl
float dist = length(uEye - v_worldPos);
float fog = 1.0 - exp(-uFogDensity * dist);
color = mix(color, uFogColor, clamp(fog, 0.0, 1.0));
```

Fog color `(0.55, 0.70, 0.90)` matches the sky horizon, creating seamless atmospheric perspective. Density `0.02` provides gradual falloff from ~20 to ~100 world units.

---
### 6. Particle System (20 pts)

**Files:** `particlesystem.cpp`, `particlesystem.h`, `particle.vert`, `particle.frag`

#### Instanced Rendering

To efficiently render thousands of precipitation particles, we utilize **Instanced Rendering**. Instead of issuing a draw call for each particle, we use a single `glDrawArraysInstanced` call to render a shared quad geometry.

- **Data Layout:**
  - **Per-Vertex:** Local quad coordinates (static VBO).
  - **Per-Instance:** World position, color, and size (dynamic VBOs with `glVertexAttribDivisor(..., 1)`).
- **Buffer Management:** Particle state is updated on the CPU and streamed to the GPU via `glBufferData` with `GL_STREAM_DRAW` each frame.

#### Weather Types & Physics

The system supports two distinct weather modes, automatically toggled by the Color Grading presets:

1. **Snow (Type 0):**
   - **Motion:** Particles fall slowly with a sinusoidal sway in X/Z to simulate air resistance and turbulence.
   - **Appearance:** Soft, circular billboards generated in the fragment shader using `smoothstep` for fuzzy edges.
   - **Lifecycle:** Particles respawn at random heights when they hit the ground or expire.

2. **Rain (Type 1):**
   - **Motion:** Fast vertical descent.
   - **Appearance:** Elongated streaks. The vertex shader stretches the billboard along the Y-axis based on velocity, while the fragment shader applies a vertical fade gradient.

#### Shader-Based Billboarding

To ensure particles always face the camera, we perform billboarding in the vertex shader:
```glsl
vec3 cameraRight = vec3(view[0][0], view[1][0], view[2][0]);
vec3 cameraUp = vec3(view[0][1], view[1][1], view[2][1]);
vec3 vertexPos = aInstancePos + offset 
               + cameraRight * aLocalPos.x * size 
               + cameraUp * aLocalPos.y * size;
```

---

### 7. Camera Path (20 pts)

**Files:** `camera_path.h`, `bezier.h`, `realtime.cpp`

#### Piecewise Bezier Splines

We implemented a robust **Piecewise Bezier Spline** system to create smooth, cinematic camera movements. The system decouples position and rotation interpolation to handle the 6-DOF camera state effectively.

- **Algorithm:** **De Casteljau's Algorithm** is used for numerical stability when evaluating points on the curve.
- **Continuity:** The system ensures **C1 Continuity** (continuous velocity), preventing jerky camera movements at keyframe transitions.

#### Space-Agnostic Interpolation

The `BezierSpline` class is templated and uses a `SpaceTraits` struct to define interpolation rules for different data types:

1. **Position (`glm::vec3`):** Uses standard linear algebra (Linear Interpolation) for control point calculation.
   ```cpp
   static glm::vec3 Interpolate(const glm::vec3 &x, const glm::vec3 &y, float u) {
       return x + u * (y - x);
   }
   ```

2. **Rotation (`glm::quat`):** Uses **Spherical Linear Interpolation (Slerp)** to interpolate between orientation quaternions. This ensures the camera rotates along the shortest path on the 4D hypersphere with constant angular velocity, avoiding the "gimbal lock" issues of Euler angles.

#### Keyframe System

The path is defined by a sequence of keyframes (Position + Rotation + Time). In `Realtime::timerEvent`, we evaluate the spline at the current time `t` (looping every 20 seconds) to update the camera's View Matrix.

### Post-Processing Pipeline & Color Grading

**Files:** `shaders/post.frag`, `shaders/post.frag`, `src/realtime.cpp`

1. Scene Pass -> HDR Off-Screen FBO
All geometry (terrain, water, sky, L-system forest) is rendered into:
- `m_texSceneColor` — RGBA16F HDR color buffer
- `m_texSceneDepth` — Depth24 buffer
This allows: HDR lighting accumulation, depth-aware effects (fog, atmospheric falloff), a clean separation between rendering and color styling

2. Post-Processing Pass -> Full-screen Quad
A second pass runs a custom shader on a screen-filling quad:
- Tonemapping (Reinhard)
- Exposure control (EV/stop-based)
- Depth linearization
- Fog reconstruction
- Color grading via Lift / Gamma / Gain / Tint
- Mode-dependent LUT-like transformations

#### Weather Presets via Color Grading
We added two cinematic grading presets, toggled by UI checkboxes:

#### Cold Blue (Snowy/Mountain)
- Slight exposure boost
- Cooler tint (blue-leaning)
- Higher contrast
- Crisp atmosphere

This preset enhances the clarity of mountains and snow regions.

#### Rainy / Overcast
A physically motivated grey-blue “rainy day” look:
- Strong desaturation (mixing toward luminance)
- Gamma lift -> reduced mid-tone contrast
- Gain reduction -> softer highlights
- Significant depth-based fog -> low visibility, washed distance
- Cool grey tint

This yields a believable “fog-eats-the-horizon” atmosphere seen in rainy environments.


## UI Controls

| Slider | Effect |
|--------|--------|
| Parameter 1 | Terrain frequency (low = smooth, high = rugged) |
| Parameter 2 | Terrain height scale |
| Parameter 3 | Domain warping strength; river parameters when EC3 enabled |
| Parameter 4 | Vegetation Coverage |
| Parameter 5 | Tree size and complexity |
| Parameter 6 | Leaf density per tree |

| Checkbox | Effect |
|----------|--------|
| EC1 | Terrain terracing (cliff steps) |
| EC2 | Crater generation |
| EC3 | Ridged-noise river valleys |
| EC4 | L-System forest rendering |
| Cold Blue | Cold Blue filter |
| Rainy | Rainy filter |

---

## Collaboration / References

### Code References

- **L-Systems:** [shortstheory/l-systems-opengl](https://github.com/shortstheory/l-systems-opengl) 
  — Referenced for L-System grammar design and turtle interpreter structure.
- **Procedural Terrain:** [AntonHakansson/procedural-terrain](https://github.com/AntonHakansson/procedural-terrain) 
  — Referenced for terrain generation techniques and multi-layer texturing approach.

### Learning Resources

- **L-Systems:** [The Algorithmic Beauty of Plants](http://algorithmicbotany.org/papers/#abop), [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/L-system)
- **Instanced Rendering:** [LearnOpenGL - Instancing](https://learnopengl.com/Advanced-OpenGL/Instancing)
- **Normal Mapping:** [LearnOpenGL - Normal Mapping](https://learnopengl.com/Advanced-Lighting/Normal-Mapping)
- **Tri-Planar Mapping:** [Martin Palko's Guide](https://www.martinpalko.com/triplanar-mapping/)
- **Procedural Terrain:** [Inigo Quilez - fBm](https://iquilezles.org/articles/fbm/), [GPU Gems Ch.1](https://developer.nvidia.com/gpugems/gpugems3/part-i-geometry/chapter-1-generating-complex-procedural-terrains-using-gpu)
- **Fog:** [LearnOpenGL - Fog](https://learnopengl.com/Advanced-OpenGL/Fog)

### Textures

1. Some Terrain PBR textures sourced from [ambientCG](https://ambientcg.com/) (CC0 license).
2. Some Terrain PBR texture sets sourced from 
[AntonHakansson/procedural-terrain](https://github.com/AntonHakansson/procedural-terrain/tree/main).

## File Structure

```
├── resources/
│   ├── shaders/                    # GLSL shader source files
│   │   ├── terrain.vert/frag       # Multi-layer PBR terrain
│   │   ├── water.vert/frag         # Animated water surface
│   │   ├── forest.vert/frag        # Instanced vegetation
│   │   ├── particle.vert/frag      # Instanced particle system (Snow/Rain)  
│   │   ├── sky.vert/frag           # Procedural sky gradient
│   │   ├── default.vert/frag       # Basic Phong shader
│   │   └── post.vert/frag          # Postprocessing pipeline + Color grading
│   └── textures/                   # PBR texture sets
│
└── src/
    ├── particles/                  # Particle System                      
    │   ├── particle.h              # Particle struct definition          
    │   └── particlesystem.cpp/h    # Particle simulation & rendering     
    ├── shapes/                     # Primitive tessellation (from Project 5)
    ├── terrain/
    │   ├── terraingenerator.cpp/h  # Procedural terrain (fBm, rivers, craters)
    │   └── voxel_chunk.cpp/h       # (Unused) voxel terrain experiment
    ├── utils/
    │   ├── aspectratiowidget/      # Qt widget utility
    │   ├── bezier.h                # Generic Bezier Spline implementation   
    │   ├── camera_path.h           # Camera path management               
    │   ├── gl_mesh.h               # GLMesh wrapper with instanced draw
    │   ├── sceneparser.cpp/h       # Scene file parsing
    │   └── shaderloader.h          # Shader compilation utilities
    ├── vegetation/
    │   └── lsystem_tree.cpp/h      # L-System grammar & turtle interpreter
    ├── camera.cpp/h                # Camera controls (view/proj, movement)
    ├── mainwindow.cpp├── resources/
│   ├── shaders/                    # GLSL shader source files
│   │   ├── terrain.vert/frag       # Multi-layer PBR terrain
│   │   ├── water.vert/frag         # Animated water surface
│   │   ├── forest.vert/frag        # Instanced vegetation
│   │   ├── particle.vert/frag      # Instanced particle system (Snow/Rain)  
│   │   ├── sky.vert/frag           # Procedural sky gradient
│   │   ├── default.vert/frag       # Basic Phong shader
│   │   └── post.vert/frag          # Postprocessing pipeline + Color grading
│   └── textures/                   # PBR texture sets
│
└── src/
    ├── particles/                  # Particle System                      
    │   ├── particle.h              # Particle struct definition     
    │   └── particlesystem.cpp/h    # Particle simulation & rendering       
    ├── shapes/                     # Primitive tessellation (from Project 5)
    ├── terrain/
    │   ├── terraingenerator.cpp/h  # Procedural terrain (fBm, rivers, craters)
    │   └── voxel_chunk.cpp/h       # (Unused) voxel terrain experiment
    ├── utils/
    │   ├── aspectratiowidget/      # Qt widget utility
    │   ├── bezier.h                # Generic Bezier Spline implementation  
    │   ├── camera_path.h           # Camera path management                
    │   ├── gl_mesh.h               # GLMesh wrapper with instanced draw
    │   ├── sceneparser.cpp/h       # Scene file parsing
    │   └── shaderloader.h          # Shader compilation utilities
    ├── vegetation/
    │   └── lsystem_tree.cpp/h      # L-System grammar & turtle interpreter
    ├── camera.cpp/h                # Camera controls (view/proj, movement)
    ├── mainwindow.cpp
```
